Add Trino 2023 recap post (#595)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2024-01-19-trino-2023-wrapped.md

made. Commander Bun Bun has been hard at work, so if you haven’t been paying
close attention to Trino or want an idea of all that went down in 2023, we’re
happy to present you with an end of year recap. We’ll be exploring what’s gone
on in the community, on development, the events we’ve hosted, and discuss the
cool new features and technologies you can use when you’re running Trino in

<!--more-->

## 2023 by the numbers

* 64,288 views 👀 on YouTube
* 5,872 hours watched ⌚on YouTube
* 5,018 new commits 💻 in GitHub
* 2,985 new stargazers ⭐ in GitHub
* 2,494 pull requests merged ✅ in GitHub
* 1,227 issues 📝 created in GitHub
* 704 new subscribers 📺 in YouTube
* 45 videos 🎥 uploaded to YouTube
* 30 Trino 🚀 releases
* 39 blog ✍️ posts
* 10 Trino Community Broadcast ▶️ episodes
* 2 Trino ⛰️ Summits

We’re excited to say that Trino continued to grow in 2023 - GitHub stars
increased by nearly 50% total and by 8% more than last year, commits increased
by 7%, and Slack usage picked up dramatically. YouTube viewership was up 7%
despite a lack of Pokemon-themed musical content compared to 2022 (our bad), and
30 releases kept new versions of Trino coming out more than every other week.

> The Twitter/X account is no longer active for a few reasons that astute readers

Reviewer: Not sure we really want to mention this

around Commander Bunbun’s Lake House Summer Camp, with a focus on integrating
Trino with lakehouse and data lake architectures. Trino Summit only wrapped up a
little over a month ago, rounding out the year and highlighting some of the
amazing developments that we’ll be talking about later in this blog post.

Trino Fest has historically been the smaller event, but it did some catching up
in 2023, as both Trino Fest and Trino Summit were made virtual and expanded to 2
days this year. Easier to attend than ever before, we reached a combined total
of about 1,200 live attendees, with thousands more views on demand.

The lineups were packed with 34 talks across both events, featuring speakers
from huge Trino users like Salesforce, Stripe, Apple, and Lyft, as well as from
major Trino contributors like Starburst, Tabular, and Bloomberg. You can
view [recordings of every Trino Fest talk](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLFnr63che7wbBu_czq-SS9iVdQ4CIv2z1)
and [every Trino Summit talk](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLFnr63che7wYeJLUjUaEftCFfjymhgLcq)
on the Trino YouTube channel if you missed out.

### Meetups and international events

> One of the more exciting developments was our first major event in Japan -

Reviewer: wasnt a first at all .. just came back .. unless you dont count PrestoSQL events

[Trino Conference Tokyo]({{site.url}}{% post_url 2023-10-11-a-report-about-trino-conference-tokyo-2023 %}). 
A virtual event with four sessions, it brought Trino to a Japanese-speaking
audience and further pushed our favorite query engine across language borders.
On top of that,

> [Starburst hosted a Trino meetup in Bengaluru](https://www.starburst.io/info/india-trino-meetup-miq/?utm_source=trino&utm_medium=slack&utm_campaign=APAC-FY24-Q4-CM-india-Meetup-at-MiQ-Digital), 

Reviewer: I dont think Starburst was hosting .. just co-organizing .. same as in Japan

and the community organized the first-ever Korean Trino meetup (pictured below).

<img src="/assets/blog/2023-review/trino-kr-meetup.png" float="center">

And last but not
least, [Trino, the Definitive Guide, 2nd Edition](/trino-the-definitive-guide.html)

> was translated into Mandarin.

Reviewer: and Polish

## The Trino Gateway

> One of the biggest announcements in the Trino Community this year was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the biggest announcements in the Trino community this year was
```

the [launch of the Trino Gateway]({{site.url}}{% post_url
2023-09-28-trino-gateway %}). A proxy and
load-balancer, it’s a crucial piece of Trino infrastructure for organizations
that need more than one Trino cluster to suit their needs.

Why would you want more than one Trino cluster? Maybe you want one cluster with
fault-tolerant execution enabled for ETL workloads and another cluster for
speedy ad-hoc analytics. Perhaps you have analysts performing wildly
differently-sized queries, and high-volume compute-intensive queries are proving
to be bad neighbors for lightweight and low-latency queries that shouldn’t take

> more than milliseconds. Historically, you would have to manually manage swapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more than milliseconds. Historically, all users would have to manually manage swapping
```

between clusters, establish a new connection, and try not to get a headache in
the process.

Enter the Trino Gateway! By routing all of your Trino traffic automatically,
it’s never been easier to manage, maintain, and query multiple Trino clusters at
once. Load balancing ensures that no one cluster gets overworked, and it’s the
perfect way to stop large queries from getting in the way of the little guys.
Add in the fact that you can seamlessly shut down an individual cluster for
updates or maintenance while the Trino Gateway routes traffic elsewhere, and
it’s easy to see why this is such a game-changer. We’re super excited for it to
be out there in the world, and we hope it makes running Trino at the largest
scales simpler and faster than ever before.

For more information on the Trino Gateway, check out:

* [The announcement blog post]({{site.url}}{% post_url 2023-09-28-trino-gateway %})
* [The quickstart guide](https://github.com/trinodb/trino-gateway/blob/main/docs/quickstart.md)
* [The main Trino Gateway repo](https://github.com/trinodb/trino-gateway/tree/main)

## New features!

> ### SQL Routines (User-defined functions!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SQL routines (User-defined functions!)
```

Or maybe User-defined SQL routines ?

or just SQL routines

> Whether you want to refer to them as SQL routines or as user-defined functions,

Reviewer: I would avoid the user-defined function name usage so we dont restart that discussion again and again

they’re a big deal. Fresh off the presses and only a few months old, they do
exactly what you’d expect them to do: you, a user, can define and re-use your
own functions! Define and use them inline as part of a query to make that query
cleaner, easier, and simpler to understand. Or, if you’re really cooking, you

> can run a query that defines the routine on the schema or catalog, allowing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can run a query that defines the routine and stores it in a schema of a catalog, allowing
```

> other Trino users querying it to access the same function time and time again as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other Trino users to access the same routine time and time again as
```

part of their other queries. It’s a level of customization that we’ve never had
before in Trino, and no longer do you need to write your own Java plugins in
order to create and re-use functions that do exactly what you need them to do.

If you want to learn more about SQL routines, you can check
out [the introduction to SQL routines](/docs/current/routines/introduction.html)
in our documentation, as well as a
few [example routines](/docs/current/routines/examples.html) which give a good

> look at how they can be used.

Reviewer: Also demo in SQL training

Reviewer: we should work the training in anyway with link to the four videos .. maybe do that here

Reviewer: Here the link to the SQL training video - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1siAYR6BzzY&list=PLFnr63che7wYzZoo5yyEF5R1QrOH6VRq3&index=4

### Schema evolution and dynamic catalogs

While we’re providing more power, customization, and flexibility to Trino users,
it’s also important to highlight just how much has been added this year to make
it easier to adjust things on the fly.

> Schema evolution came first, allowing you to alter columns’ data types, rename

Reviewer: This is a bit misleading since schema evolution was mostly improved with the Hive connector and Hive changes..  anyway.

Reviewer: ping me to chat about the details .. or leave schema evolution out and just talk about dynamic catalogs

columns, and handle nested fields when dropping columns. Instead of needing to
use the underlying database or modify it some other way and reboot Trino, Trino
is now aware of when your schema changes and can handle the adjustments on the
fly.

But we’ve experimentally taken things one step further in 2023, adding dynamic
catalogs to Trino. Rather than adjusting your schema one column at a time, what
about adding or dropping an entire catalog in one go? You can do that now.
Though it’s currently still bleeding-edge and not ready for widespread use on

> your important production tables, we’re looking forward to improving it and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your important production data sources, we’re looking forward to improving it and
```

making it resilient and stable in 2024.

### Project Hummingbird

Trino has always been about squeezing out every ounce of performance that you

> can get. You can go check out our [release notes](/current/release.html) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can get. Check out our [release notes](/current/release.html) and
```

> you’ll see that every version has at least a couple performance improvements in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you’ll see that every version includes at least a couple performance improvements.
```

> it, if not more. Over time, these performance improvements add up to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over time, these performance improvements add up to a
```

substantial gain, meaning that version-over-version, year-over-year, Trino is
always getting faster. Project Hummingbird was a concerted effort this year to
take a look at the core engine and make a number of small improvements that
would add up to something
substantial. [The GitHub issue tracking it](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/14237)
is gloriously nearly done, with a lot of that work done in 2023.

### Lakehouse improvements

Want to leverage the historical log of all actions taken on a table in Hudi? The
new `$timeline` system table has you covered. How about in Delta Lake? We’ve got
the `table_changes` function for that, and views were added there, too. Too many
metadata tables to list were added to Iceberg, along with the REST, JDBC, and
Nessie catalogs for metadata.

### Java 21?

> Java 21. It’s required to run the latest version of Trino now. With the upgrade

Reviewer: Somewhere in here link to the blog post

> Java 21. It’s required to run the latest version of Trino now. With the upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java 21. It’s required to run version 436 of Trino and any future releases. With the upgrade
```

from Java 17 to 21 comes a ton of improvements that will make development on
Trino easier and better than ever, which will in turn make it faster and
smoother than ever. Though not as huge of a deal as our upgrade to Java 17 last

> year, expect to see the benefits coming down the pipeline as the engineers

Reviewer: I dont think it was last year we switched to 17 .. feels like longer ago

Author: July 2022

working on Trino are able to take advantage of the latest and greatest features
in Java.

## Trino ecosystem updates

### Python clients

Trino’s own [Python client](https://github.com/trinodb/trino-python-client) saw

> heavy development in 2023. It was updated to SQLAlchemy 2.0 and had type support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
heavy development in 2023. It was updated to support SQLAlchemy 2.0 and had type support
```

fully fleshed out, making it a robust, free, and open-source tool for running
your Trino queries.

Elsewhere in the Python ecosystem, we heard from

> both [Fugue](https://youtu.be/aKhI1Phfn-o)

Reviewer: maybe link to the blog posts instead?

Reviewer: ok

### And other clients, too!

Also on the Trino Community Broadcast repping new client support for Trino in
2023 were [Dolphin Scheduler](/episodes/45), [PopSQL](/episodes/51),
and [Coginiti](/episodes/53). Dolphin Scheduler is a workflow orchestrator - and
scheduler! - that can be used to routinely run and coordinate Trino queries.
PopSQL is like Google Drive for SQL, providing a suite of collaborative tools
for editing and working on queries as a team, including synchronous query
editing, storing query history, and a robust commenting and feedback system.
Coginiti is a high-powered data workspace that connects to Trino among many
other things, supporting a host of powerful features that make it easier to
reuse code and snippets of queries, as well as featuring embedded variables to
minimize redundancy. If you want to learn more about any of these clients, click
in on the links above to check out the Trino Community Broadcast where we went
in-depth with them!

Oh, and don’t forget
the [Trino Typescript client](https://regadas.dev/trino-js-client/), for when
you want to work at the beautiful intersection of web development and accessing
tons of data.

### New maintainers

> Trino saw three new maintainers added to its ranks this year in the form

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trino saw three new maintainers added to its ranks this year:
```

and then list ..

of [Manfred Moser](https://github.com/mosabua)
, [James Petty](https://github.com/pettyjamesm),
and [Mateusz Gajewski](https://github.com/wendigo). Manfred even took the
liberty of updating the website’s [roles page](/development/roles) to list out
all our maintainers. Thank you to them for their dedication to making Trino the

> best it can be, and congratulations to them on their shiny maintainer titles!

Reviewer: Maybe we want to add sub project maintainer and call out ?

## Conclusion

2022 had been the busiest year in Trino’s history, but 2023 has managed to
surpass it. If you’re interested in contributing to Trino, make sure to check it
out on [GitHub](https://github.com/trinodb/trino). Even if you’re not interested
in contributing, give us a star on GitHub, anyway! It’s been a great year for

> Commander Bunbun, and we can’t wait to show you what 2024 has in store for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commander Bun Bun, and we can’t wait to show you what 2024 has in store for
```

Trino, Trino is now aware of when your schema changes and can handle the
adjustments on the fly.

But if you don't use Hive and are feeling left out, we’ve experimentally taken
things one step further in 2023, adding dynamic catalogs to Trino. Rather than
adjusting your schema one column at a time, what about adding or dropping an
entire catalog in one go? You can do that now. Though it’s currently still
bleeding-edge and not ready for widespread use on your important production
data sources, we’re looking forward to improving it and making it resilient and
stable in 2024.

### Project Hummingbird

Trino has always been about squeezing out every ounce of performance that you
can get. You can go check out our [release notes](/current/release.html) and
you’ll see that every version has at least a couple performance improvements in
it, if not more. Over time, these performance improvements add up to a
substantial gain, meaning that version-over-version, year-over-year, Trino is
always getting faster. Project Hummingbird was a concerted effort this year to
take a look at the core engine and make a number of small improvements that

> would add up to something

Reviewer 2: It's more than "small improvements". Some are big architectural changes to how the core execution works.

substantial. [The GitHub issue tracking it](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/14237)

> is gloriously nearly done, with a lot of that work done in 2023.

Reviewer 2: Not even close :) We're only scratching the surface.

---
layout: post
title:  "Trino 2023 wrapped"
author: Cole Bowden
image: /assets/blog/2023-review/wrapped.png
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
show_pagenav: true
---

If [“Wrapped” is good enough for Spotify](https://www.newsroom.spotify.com/2023-wrapped/), 
it’s good enough for Trino, right? As we look forward to a bright 2024, we can
also take a moment to get sentimental, look back at everything we’ve
accomplished, and reflect on the progress we’ve made. Commander Bun Bun has been

> hard at work, so if you haven’t been paying close attention to Trino or want an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hard at work, so if you haven’t been paying close attention to Trino, or want an
```

Author: It's not an independent clause after so this isn't correct

year recap. We’ll be exploring what’s gone on in the community, on development,
the events we’ve hosted, and discuss the cool new features and technologies you
can use when you’re running Trino.

<!--more-->

{% youtube IRq3ZNR9Dgs %}

## 2023 by the numbers

* 64,288 views 👀 on YouTube
* 5,872 hours watched ⌚on YouTube
* 5,018 new commits 💻 in GitHub
* 2,985 new stargazers ⭐ in GitHub
* 2,494 pull requests merged ✅ in GitHub
* 1,227 issues 📝 created in GitHub
* 704 new subscribers 📺 in YouTube
* 45 videos 🎥 uploaded to YouTube
* 30 Trino 🚀 releases
* 39 blog ✍️ posts
* 10 Trino Community Broadcast ▶️ episodes
* 2 Trino ⛰️ Summits

We’re excited to say that Trino continued to grow in 2023:

- GitHub stars increased by nearly 50% total and by 8% more than last year
- Commits increased by 7%
- Slack usage picked up dramatically
- YouTube viewership was up 7% despite a lack of Pokemon-themed musical content compared to 2022 (our bad)
- 30 releases kept new versions of Trino coming out more than every other week.

Thanks in part to all that growth, it’s more important than ever to be on
[our Slack](/slack.html). If you’re a Trino user or community member and aren’t

> already on there, you’re missing out on ! Make sure to join up for community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already on there, you’re missing out on! Make sure to join up for community
```

announcements, release statuses, the shared expertise of the entire Trino
community, and event-specific channels for discussion when we’re hosting things 
like Trino Fest and Trino Summit. Speaking of those…

> ## Trino Events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Trino events
```

from huge Trino users like Salesforce, Stripe, Apple, and Lyft, as well as from
major Trino contributors like Starburst, Tabular, and Bloomberg. You can
view [recordings of every Trino Fest talk](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLFnr63che7wbBu_czq-SS9iVdQ4CIv2z1)
and [every Trino Summit talk](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLFnr63che7wYeJLUjUaEftCFfjymhgLcq)
on the Trino YouTube channel if you missed out.

### Meetups and international events

One of the more exciting developments was our a major event in Japan -
[Trino Conference Tokyo]({{site.url}}{% post_url 2023-10-11-a-report-about-trino-conference-tokyo-2023 %}). 
A virtual event with four sessions, it brought Trino to a Japanese-speaking
audience and further pushed our favorite query engine across language borders.
On top of that,
[Starburst co-hosted a Trino meetup in Bengaluru](https://www.starburst.io/info/india-trino-meetup-miq/?utm_source=trino&utm_medium=slack&utm_campaign=APAC-FY24-Q4-CM-india-Meetup-at-MiQ-Digital), 
and the community organized the first-ever Korean Trino meetup (pictured below).

<img src="/assets/blog/2023-review/trino-kr-meetup.png" float="center">

> And last but not

Reviewer: wrapping is odd

least, [Trino, the Definitive Guide, 2nd Edition](/trino-the-definitive-guide.html)
was translated into Mandarin and Polish.

> 

Reviewer: Remove redundant empty lines

more than milliseconds. Historically, users would have to manually manage
swapping between clusters, establish a new connection, and try not to get a
headache in the process.

Enter the Trino Gateway! By routing all of your Trino traffic automatically,
it’s never been easier to manage, maintain, and query multiple Trino clusters at
once. Load balancing ensures that no one cluster gets overworked, and it’s the
perfect way to stop large queries from getting in the way of the little guys.
Add in the fact that you can seamlessly shut down an individual cluster for
updates or maintenance while the Trino Gateway routes traffic elsewhere, and
it’s easy to see why this is such a game-changer. We’re super excited for it to
be out there in the world, and we hope it makes running Trino at the largest
scales simpler and faster than ever before.

For more information on the Trino Gateway, check out:

* [The announcement blog post]({{site.url}}{% post_url 2023-09-28-trino-gateway %})
* [The quickstart guide](https://github.com/trinodb/trino-gateway/blob/main/docs/quickstart.md)
* [The main Trino Gateway repo](https://github.com/trinodb/trino-gateway/tree/main)

> ## New features!

Reviewer: We can leave this title out I think

### SQL routines

Whether you want to refer to them as SQL routines or as user-defined functions,
they’re a big deal. Fresh off the presses and only a few months old, they do
exactly what you’d expect them to do: you, a user, can define and re-use your
own functions! Define and use them inline as part of a query to make that query
cleaner, easier, and simpler to understand. Or, if you’re really cooking, you
can run a query that defines the routine in the schema of the catalog. This
allows other Trino users to access the same routine time and time again as part
of their other queries. It’s a level of customization that we’ve never had

> before in Trino, and no longer do you need to write your own Java plugins in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before in Trino, and no longer do you need to write your own Java plugins
```

Author: it's "in order to" so I think this can stay

> order to create and re-use functions that do exactly what you need them to do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to create and re-use functions that do exactly what you need them to do.
```

If you want to learn more about SQL routines, you can check
out [the introduction to SQL routines](/docs/current/routines/introduction.html)
in our documentation, as well as a
few [example routines](/docs/current/routines/examples.html) which give a good
look at how they can be used.

### Schema evolution and dynamic catalogs

While we’re providing more power, customization, and flexibility to Trino users,
it’s also important to highlight just how much has been added this year to make
it easier to adjust things on the fly.

> Schema evolution in Hive came first, allowing you to alter columns’ data types,

Reviewer: I am not sure how correct this paragraph is technically ..

rename columns, and handle nested fields when dropping columns. Instead of
needing to use the underlying database or modify it some other way and reboot
Trino, Trino is now aware of when your schema changes and can handle the
adjustments on the fly.

But if you don't use Hive and are feeling left out, we’ve experimentally taken
things one step further in 2023, adding dynamic catalogs to Trino. Rather than
adjusting your schema one column at a time, what about adding or dropping an
entire catalog in one go? You can do that now. Though it’s currently still
bleeding-edge and not ready for widespread use on your important production
data sources, we’re looking forward to improving it and making it resilient and
stable in 2024.

### Project Hummingbird

Trino has always been about squeezing out every ounce of performance that you

> can get. Check out our [release notes](/current/release.html) and

Reviewer: I think that link is wrong .. /docs/current/release.html ?

you’ll see that every version includes at least a couple performance
improvements. Over time, these performance improvements add up to a substantial
gain, meaning that version-over-version, year-over-year, Trino is always getting
faster. Project Hummingbird was a concerted effort this year to take a look at
the core engine and make a number of architectural changes paired with small
improvements that would add up to something very substantial.
[The GitHub issue tracking it](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/14237)
lists a ton of work that's been accomplished already, with a lot of that work
done in 2023. Though stay tuned for more, because that's only scratching the
surface...

### Lakehouse improvements

Want to leverage the historical log of all actions taken on a table in Hudi? The
new `$timeline` system table has you covered. How about in Delta Lake? We’ve got
the `table_changes` function for that, and views were added there, too. Too many
metadata tables to list were added to Iceberg, along with the REST, JDBC, and
Nessie catalogs for metadata.

> ### Java 21?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Java 21?!
```

Java 21. It’s required to run version Trino versions 436 and later. With
[the upgrade from Java 17 to 21]({{site.url}}{% post_url 2023-11-03-java-21 %})
comes a ton of improvements that will make development on Trino easier and
better than ever, which will in turn make it faster and smoother than ever.
Though not as huge of a deal as our upgrade to Java 17 last year, expect to see
the benefits coming down the pipeline as the engineers working on Trino are able
to take advantage of the latest and greatest features in Java.

## Trino ecosystem updates

> 

Reviewer: Add some of the next paragraph in here..

editing, storing query history, and a robust commenting and feedback system.
Coginiti is a high-powered data workspace that connects to Trino among many
other things, supporting a host of powerful features that make it easier to
reuse code and snippets of queries, as well as featuring embedded variables to
minimize redundancy. If you want to learn more about any of these clients, click
in on the links above to check out the Trino Community Broadcast where we went
in-depth with them!

Oh, and don’t forget
the [Trino Typescript client](https://regadas.dev/trino-js-client/), for when
you want to work at the beautiful intersection of web development and accessing
tons of data.

### New maintainers

Trino saw three new maintainers added to its ranks this year:

- [Manfred Moser](https://github.com/mosabua)
- [James Petty](https://github.com/pettyjamesm)
- [Mateusz Gajewski](https://github.com/wendigo)

Manfred even took the liberty of updating the website’s
[roles page](/development/roles) to list out all our maintainers. Thank you to
them for their dedication to making Trino the best it can be, and
congratulations to them on their shiny maintainer titles!

## Conclusion

> 2022 had been the busiest year in Trino’s history, but 2023 has managed to

Reviewer: maybe link to 2022 recap?

surpass it. If you’re interested in contributing to Trino, make sure to check it
out on [GitHub](https://github.com/trinodb/trino). Even if you’re not interested

> in contributing, give us a star on GitHub, anyway! It’s been a great year for

Reviewer: add link to https://trino.io/star
